the most meaningful questions in life
are always questions that you answered
before especially when you've got over
1,000 videos on your YouTube channel I
got a question for the audience and it
was a question and address before but
the answer was buried somewhere in the
middle of a 40-minute long video where
it wasn't in the title of the channel I
couldn't find it easily a bunch of my
other fans we're looking right oh yes
somewhere you address that question the
question was this if you have left-wing
friends if you have communist friends if
you have socialist friends if you have
friends who confront you with the
ultimatum that profit is evil asked you
in various ways to justify how you can
have a society built on profit because
from their perspective profit is theft
that's a rhetorical claim that's
actually older than communism think
older than the formal definition of
socialism - all right
they say property is theft how can a
society built on this concept of a
for-profit corporation for profit
company etc etc be anything other than
evil how to respond to this question we
are assuming here that you're talking to
somebody you care about we're assuming
this is not some kind of knock-down
drag-out internet debate this isn't
someone you have contempt for you're
just trying to pawn in the parlance of
our times just imagine if people are
watching this video
decades in the future and they have no
idea what this slang term pone meant but
here I am Here I am dating myself I use
alright how do you address this question
treating it as a meaningful and sincere
question answer it in a meaningful way
not behaving as if you're just debunking
a left-wing meme about profit capitalism
the idea that property is theft and that
everything goes on in capitalism any
form of employment as long as it's for
profit is slavery all right the first
approach which I would use again if I
care about someone I'm trying to field
in the human being I normally do not
like to start from abstract reasoning
but from very palpable bottom-up
reasoning more appealing to real-world
experiences they've had for example I
recently looked at the listing of all of
the colleges in this part of Canada
in Canada that will give you a degree in
early childhood education so this is
different from being a full-fledged
schoolteacher lets you do something like
run a kindergarten other kinds of
children's programs and the lists
provided by the government was divided
into private for-profit institutions
nonprofit institutions right just a few
different categories like that and you
would be surprised if you look at the
colleges especially say low-level
training colleges that prepare people
for technical hands-on jobs you might
really be surprised that some of them
are for-profit when you assumed they
were nonprofit and vice versa and if you
actually go and visit these colleges and
talk to this students and talk to the
teachers and look at how they operate
there might be remarkably little
difference in your state in your city
where you're living between a for-profit
Technical College and a not-for-profit
techni college you know if the person
you're talking to you if you can talk to
them on that level if you can actually
appeal to something they have real-world
experience with where they can contrast
a for-profit and not-for-profit project
institution business that you want to
put this then this will start to get the
wheels turning because what you're
really a sailing here is an overly
abstract idea of what profit is linked
to an overly abstract idea about what
capitalism itself is now in an earlier
video I spoke through in great detail
where depending where you live you may
not have this experience how subtle the
difference is between going to a
corporate for-profit grocery store and a
small co-op locally owned not-for-profit
grocery store and you can start to list
off what the differences are right but
if you have this experience in the real
world certainly most major cities in
Canada throughout all of Europe
depending on where you're on the United
States you may or may not have co-op
grocery stores met I don't think that
popular in America but a co-op grocery
store your experience as a customer is
98 percent the same and the differences
although subtle it's worth talking about
a little bit here
you'll find the coop grocery store
because they don't have a profit margin
they have to be much more conservative
about adopting new products putting new
products on the shelf whereas the
for-profit grocery store will take risks
and say oh okay we think this is gonna
be the hot new product in the year 2020
and though get that product in the Shelf
they'll do more promotions they'll do
more sales one of the reasons to have
sales is that you overstock something
you didn't sell as many as you thought
you would and you lower the price there
is more risk taking there's more
innovation in the for-profit grocery
store but hey let's not kid ourselves
here this is not the kind of innovation
that's gonna put a man on the moon oh
this is the type of small innovation
that's ongoing all the time with the
restlessness of Commerce in the
for-profit sector and it is true the non
profit store lags behind that a little
bit you may find that the non profit
grocery store pays its employees
slightly better would you actually look
into it you'd be amazed at just how
slight the difference is and indeed just
because the for-profit grocery store may
be more successful you may well be
surprised the other way around that
actually the for-profit shop is paying
it's paying better salaries providing
better benefits so on and so forth so
these are this is if someone is your
friend if they respect you and you
respect them they should be willing to
listen to this and it may be really
important to address psychologically the
defense mechanisms they have because
what they want to cling to is really no
different than a Muslim who's refusing
to listen to the particular historical
details of the life of the Prophet like
look this guy was just a human being
hey do you know how many people he
married do you know about his sex life
you know about the political conditions
do you know about his record on slavery
you know with their refusing to let you
talk about the profit and the founding
of Islam's way they only want to cling
to an abstract i can't even say a
summary of their religion they're
extrapolating abstract virtues about
their religion and refusing to hear
these kinds of you know tangible
real-world details that make them think
about it with a human face and with dirt
under the fingernails with all the
details of real world real lived
experience right you're trying to get
them to think from the ground up in
terms of empirical methods instead of
from the sky down with ideological
preaching I suppose for lack of a better
word right so you your friend may refuse
here this they may even stand up out of
their seat and say forget it I'm not
gonna let you describe to me what profit
actually Israel well then why are you
talking about profit if you're if you're
ideology is based on this if your
ideology is based on the idea that one
grocery store is engaged in theft and
slavery and exploitation because they
have profit and then you cross the
street you can literally cross the
street and go to a co-op grocery store
that doesn't have profit and yet there
is neither more nor less evidence of
theft slavery or exploitation the
explore the exploitation of man by man
to borrow phrase you know where is this
dramatic difference when we remove
profit from the equation now depending
the particular person they might have
experience with the military having
large-scale nonprofit operations have
you ever been to a barber shop on a
military base you know it's a lot like a
barbershop what which is great about the
profit motive but it's not I mean it's
it's it's the finances the economics of
how that barbershop operates is very
different you can talk to scientists
who've been in research labs some of
them are in the for-profit and corporate
side of the world some of them are run
by the military with again it's not a
profit motive it's just a command coming
from a commander so if profit is so
important if it has this profound
ethical significance why is it that we
look in vain for the evidence of that
everywhere empirically in the real world
all right now there is a more abstract
way to to reason through this this
problem and it is to say this if you
were a military commander and you said
hey I want you to build this bridge so
you're giving orders to the military
corps of engineers or maybe it's a war
situation where it's just ordinary
soldiers not okay
the here are the number of resources we
have here's how much money we have
here's how much time we have I want you
to build this this bridge you know as
quickly as possible as cheaply as
possible and your soldiers go out and
build that bridge
and they come back to say hey guess what
we managed to build the bridge in less
time with less resources using less
money and less manpower we brought it in
under budget would you as a military
commander say that's terrible you turned
a profit if you were the director of a
university or college Training Institute
that's a nonprofit Institute it's
completely let's just say it's not
merely public sector let's say it's a
charity training center right and you
give orders for them to take on some
project like this you want them to go
into a grass field and set up a tent and
then teach a series of training courses
so that a bunch of homeless people can
learn how to be metal welders let's just
say this is a situation we've got some
homeless people want to be trained to go
into welding because there's some new
jobs hiring for welders okay so you got
to set up the equipment you gotta set
then you say ok I have so much money
it's so much resort so much manpower in
so much time and the people you give the
orders to a bunch of teachers and
helpers and what-have-you
who go out to do this task they finish
it under budget ahead of schedule
they don't use all the resources that
don't use all the money that is the
moment would you say to them that's
terrible you turned a profit okay what
is profit why would anyone in those
situations describe profit as theft
profit as slavery or it and the irony is
of course if you know if you've been in
the military just read if you've read
books of military history very often
military orders can be far more
tyrannical and inflexible than the
private sector for-profit side of the
business you know they in the in the
private sector you may have a flex blast
okay this could go over budget this
could go under budget we have different
options and what happened in the Soviet
Union really was the militarization of
civilian life that's why technically
communism is referred to as a command
economy in contrast to a free market
economy or free enterprise economy it's
a command economy because you've removed
the price mechanism you've removed the
profit mechanism but instead you just
have tyrannical people giving tyrannical
orders
like your military superior who's put
there by the government's like your
military superior and who's paid a
salary and they are trying to get people
to work as hard as possible to produce
as much as possible to exact as much
profit as possible out of them but
nobody's allowed to call it profit any
more because you're working under a
military dictatorship that happens to
call itself communist socialist or
left-wing
okay so the short answer is you answer
the question of profit is theft you
answer the vilification of profit and
the broader vilification capitalism by
really in a meaningful way addressing
the question of what is profit and
illustrating it for them both in a
tangible empirical way and I think
through through a little bit of abstract
reasoning I close this video with my
usual warning what we describe as
capitalism is not a system it's not a
philosophy it's not an ideal it's just
the way of getting things done that
emerged air SATs piece-by-piece
pell-mell
ad hoc in an unplanned morass in an in a
in a spontaneous way what we call
capitalism now emerged from the
demolition of feudalism in Europe that's
all it is there are sets of standards
and practices and expectations we have
but capitalism just like say the
Industrial Revolution the Industrial
Revolution has no manifesto we can call
it a revolution right you could talk
about the capitalist revolution okay but
it's completely false to look at say the
English revolution the English Civil War
as being for or about or establishing
capitalism or even having an etiology or
utopian plan for capitalism and many
communists would deny this but it's just
as false to talk about say the French
Revolution or I would say the Indian
independence struggle there are many
many revolutions that you can say
looking back at history established
capitalism could look at Japan and going
through its series of modernizing
revolutions but they were not for
capitalism because capitalism wasn't
enunciated as an ideal or utopia to be
attained it's just
one emerge from the disintegration of
the tearing down of feudalism in Europe